# **Final Project: Linux Variant Calling Workflow**

BTEC 395 - Prof. Jeffery Robinson

Over the past few decades, the advances of whole genome sequencing (WGS) and next generation sequencing (NGS) have enabled scientists to study genomics at large and more in depth. WGS is the comprehensive process of determining genome sequences of individual species to their nearest entirety by genetic codes (Oakeson et al., 2017). In the WGS pipeline, sequencing reads from samples are first obtained through several NGS technologies, such as HiSeq, or MiSeq, starting from sample and library preparation to high throughput sequencing. After the raw reads of the entire sample genomes are obtained, several analyzing tools are utilized to process sequencing data to the desired output. The genomic information obtained from the WGS pipeline may be used to reveal the complexity and diversity of individual species through genome annotation, variant detection, as well as structural analysis and further omics studies. Variant calls are essentially useful to reconstruct phylogenetic analysis, or study the evolutionary relationships between closely related species. In a variant calling workflow, the raw FASTQ files are processed to determine the quality of reads, followed up with alignment and mapping against the reference genome to determine the exact polymorphic regions (variants) (Josh Herr et al., 2017). In this project, variant calling was done on a MiSeq sequencing dataset aligned with its reference genome from the population of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, utilizing DataCapentry workflow (Josh Herr et al., 2017). P. aeruginosa are gram negative, rod-shaped bacteria with high mobility that live mostly in environmental soil and water. Over the years, P. aeruginosa have been associated with numerous infections due to their drug-resistant nature and metabolic versatility (Winsor et al., 2009). The P. aeruginosa strain PA01 retrieved from NCBI databases was utilized as a reference genome for this project. In fact, the strain was registered in 2003 and remained the most extensively used P.aeruginosa strain as reference for research, containing a circular chromosome of 6,264,403 base pairs that was roughly 6.26 Mb in size (Winsor et al., 2009). The raw FASTQ file used to analyze and align against the reference genome are P. aeruginosa sequences produced using Illumina MiSeq on paired-end reads. The obtained FASTQ file is a part of a larger CDC Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion’s BioProject approved in 2015, with accession number PRJNNA288601. The aim of the umbrella BioProject was to sequence complete genomes of gram negative bacteria that are registered as opportunistic pathogens for NCBI’s Pathogen Detection and CDC’s healthcare-associated infections (HAIs). The FASTQ file for P. aeruginosa used in this workflow consists of 417.5 M paired bases, roughly 245.5 Mb in size[1]. At the end of the variant calling workflow, multiple file formats were generated, such as SAM, BAM, and the variant file VCF for visualization and detection of single nucleotide variants (SNVs) in the processed alignments of P. aeruginosa with its reference genome.

"The data have been deposited with links to BioProject accession number PRJNA288601 in the NCBI BioProject database; SampleID: SAMN32102135  (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/)."

**References**
- Josh Herr, Ming Tang, Lex Nederbragt, Fotis Psomopoulos (eds): "Data Carpentry: Wrangling Genomics Lesson." Version 2017.11.0, November 2017, http://www.datacarpentry.org/wrangling-genomics/, doi: 10.5281/zenodo.1064254 
- Oakeson, K. F., Wagner, J., Mendenhall, M., Rohrwasser, A., & Atkinson-Dunn, R. (2017). Bioinformatic Analyses of Whole-Genome Sequence Data in a Public Health Laboratory. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 23(9), 1441-1445. https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2309.170416. 
- Winsor, G. L., Van Rossum, T., Lo, R., Khaira, B., Whiteside, M. D., Hancock, R. E. W., & Brinkman, F. S. L. (2009). Pseudomonas Genome Database: facilitating user-friendly, comprehensive comparisons of microbial genomes. Nucleic Acids Research, 37(Database), D483–D488. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkn861 
